
langs:

the idea in each case is to try to use the smallest language to build on,
to demonstrate that technique enough to be interesting
the goal is to build towards an industrial production language
  and to develop different techniques in simple environments instead
  of in a full codebase with legacy-like issues
keep getting slowed down by building each new feature on top of a
  messy codebase
don't want to keep tidying it, don't know how to tidy it effectively
  yet in many ways
this approach means can keep developing new features in isolation
the hope is that then combining these into a language using them all
  will be relatively easily
and that the little languages approach will be the best way to
  develop new features: write them in a minimal language variant first
  then incorporate them into the main code
by separating the feature dev, from working with and integrating into
  a big code base, the speed should be faster, and it should be easier
  to do smaller steps and be productive

todo: fix the exe front end
it can run the tasty tests
it can run a script for each of the little languages that you pass
and it can run the inline tests for that script in language
  for any script you pass (for all the languages that support check
  blocks and stuff)
give options to just parse, or just type check as well as run
maybe a repl as well
  don't like command line repls
  something which is a multiline editor first, and a repl around this
  is viable, multiline text on a traditional command line repl is
  awful
  the way e.g. shell works in emacs is pretty nice, keeps the kind
  of command line thing, but has much better multiline, etc. ux

--------------------------------------

tutorial notes:

turn it into a tutorial?

can just write a few more commments?

do a dependency list for each language
it shows each language that feeds into this one as a tree
and then as a linear list that you could work through
so if you click on subject x, and there's too much new stuff
  you can look at the build up to it easily
  you aren't forced to go through everything linearly in order to not
    get out of your depth
at the end of each language, give links to every language that builds
  on this one, do it choose your own adventure style

------------------------------------



simplest expressions
  variations:
     moresimple: 1 arg fns, single let, single lam
       using desugaring with new types
     without closures
     without functions as values? how different is this from with
       functions as values but not closures?
       this might be different with other versions below
     using the reader monad transformer
  is it worth doing an example using error to get rid of monads
    completely?
    yes, can write a few lines in the same file: interpE

simplest testing framework, definitely next
  this is check + simple is with trivial parsing and execution

add a range of data types
  which of the above should be reproduced with these?
    maybe one without closures?
    see how different it is
  use the reader monad transformer only
  no desugaring at this stage
  

hypotheses:

the version of a language with functions as values but not closures
  (aka 'function pointers') is not different enough from the one
  without function pointers to write both
having closures and not having closures makes a real difference in the
  implementation with defunctionalization
  otherwise, it's pretty trivial.

add regimented haskell ffi for functions
add haskell ffi for opaque data types
  -> this gives us extensbility/flexibility to improvise
  and bootstrap the language more easily
do a complete and nicely done ffi
  then work backwards to create some steps towards it
  this will create a new base language
    start with maybe a proper ffi interface for expressions only?
      then add one for statements too later

algebraic data types, cases

statements, scripts

better testing framework
  what are the options/stages here?
  later, in language testing framework
  then as a plain module with ffi

import, modules -> do one before agdt
  and another one after
  use the renaming approach
  can do stages, first stage is just to make a module
    available under it's name
  second stage is to do export and import lists
  2.1 + sugar for import and export
  third stage is to be able to do unqualified, rename module name

type path:
  explicitly typed simple expressions
  then type inference for these
  then start to work towards the extra type features that want
  typing (try to do each one on it's own)
    letrec variants
    complete script
    ffi
    basic agdt
      is recursive an additional?
    imports
    parametric polymorpism
    extensible records?
    
    
  don't know anything about this
    want to learn asap


stuff to do on demand when needed above:

separate interpreter with desugarer

letrec, letrec*

improving the test framework
  what does the most complete example need?
  exception handling
  import
  statements
  agdt?
  ffi?


adding monads to the interpreter
adding monads to the desugarer

purescript style letrec

contracts and assertions

is the above the core?

------------------------------------------------------------------------------

interpreter/compiler path:
  a defunctionalization implementation
    this is probably a series of steps?
  a more complete bytecode
    work backwards from what llvm would look like
    so the bytecode is do most of what you would do for llvm
    but then still interpret it in a haskell interpreter
    should benchmark this to understand it
  use llvm
  garbage collection

--------------------------------------

system ux path

repl
command line interface


--------------------------------------

enchanced ffi

c
python


--------------------------------------

parsing path:
writing the basic parser from scratch
  try to get parsing specific stuff sidelined
  there are no real interesting parts of parsing, it's all just necessary
  tediousness (except maybe the parse error messages and the later
    source location message support - one you get into multiple ranges
    per syntax node/message)

extending the parser to make it more interesting
  try to have as many examples use the most trivial parsers properly
  because this path adds a lot of complexity in the parser
  and one source positions are there, a lot in the syntax too
  lots of angles
  I think this is pretty orthogonal, wait until late

syntax path:
  complete basics
  handling the tricky parts of the syntax
  doing source locations
  working on parse error messages
  I think this is pretty orthogonal, wait until late
  can decide what to do with error message
  adding a lot of nice syntax sugar

--------------------------------------

the interpreter/language packaging path

split haskell source files into multiple modules: when does this
  happen? when it becomes unweidly? I think this is as soon as
  can reuse the parser and syntax
  make it a separate step to show how it's done
  tutorial only

turn into a cabal package: when does this happen, make it into a
  separate step
  want to do this before it starts using external packages?
  not really possible
  can just have the cabal files there
  and then one step shows the cabal file progression
  this can happen separately?

--------------------------------------

error handling:
  part of parsing also:
    work on parse error quality
    adding source positions for later diagnostics
  type errors
  runtime errors
  test as much as possible in the language

--------------------------------------

optimisation path
  overlaps with interpreter/compiler path
  a big part is doing performance regression tests, and doing profiling
  
--------------------------------------

relational dbms path

extensible records

  single thread in memory transactions
  single thread durable transactions
  concurrent in memory transactions
    this needs concurrency in the language
  concurrent durable transactions
  client server (not strictly needed, but I want it)
  optimisation?
  relational algebra
  expression planning?
    -> this might turn into a more generic idea

it must be abstract: you should have a plugable layer for storage
representation, and relation values in flight representation
-> can build a simple dynamically typed version with serialization
   can build with sqlite as the persistence layer (for bootstrap purposes)
   can build a direct statically typed version
   can build 'the ultimate row based', or something traditional and/or modern
   can build a columnar engine
   all of these should be switchable - you use the same syntax to create vars, do queries, etc.
     and you can convert data between the representations
       in storage
       and as part of an expression plan

what more is needed to replace sqlite?

where could this go next? too many options

